AI is one of the fastest-moving areas of technological advancement in government defence, bringing the capability to counter threats and create opportunities.
The Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl)  provides theUKwith world-class capability in applying artificial intelligence (AI), data science and machine learning to defence and security challenges. From putting machine learning on-board Royal Navy ships, to using data science to support intelligence analysis,Dstlis at the heart of such innovation.
One ofDstl’s missions is tode-mystify the area ofAI. We help theUKMinistry of Defence (MOD) understand how it cansafely, responsibly and ethicallyuseAIto deter and de-escalate conflict, save lives and reduce harm.
Our technical experts have their finger on the pulse of new developments inAIand provide critical guidance for theUK. We work in partnership with specialists from academia, industry and allied nations to understand and develop a broad spectrum of techniques for performing tasks and discovering insights from data using automatic processes,
We are also an integral part of theDefenceAICentre (DAIC), working collaboratively to connectMODand the widerAIcommunity and enable teams acrossMODto adoptAIin their areas.
The wide range of potential applications include streamlining back-office functions, and supporting:
AIis critical to theUK’s future as a science and technology superpower, and when it comes toAI,MOD’s visionis to be “the world’s most effective, efficient, trusted and influential defence organisation for our size.”
…A radical upheaval in defence is underway andAI-related strategic competition is intensifying. Our response must be rapid, ambitious, and comprehensive.”(Defence Artificial Intelligence Strategy (2022)
Our cutting edge work covers everything from very early research looking at how machines interact with humans, to applying data science to real-world challenges and operational requirements. Our experts collaborate with international partners to help theUKand our allies advance more quickly.
The 3 nations ofAUKUS(Australia – United Kingdom – United States)recently testedAI-enabled uncrewed aerial vehiclesthat allow a human operator to locate, disable and destroy targets on the ground.
AUKUS: Autonomy andAIcollaboration
Royal Navy crews taking part in a 2021 NATO exercise inUKwaters were able to take advantage ofAIon-board ship for the first time, whenDstland our industry partners brought the latest technology into the command spaces of a Type 45 destroyer and a Type 23 frigate.
Tested against a supersonic missile threat, ourAI-based applications were designed to help detect threats earlier and provide a rapid hazard assessment to recommend options the crew can take to counter the threat. This exciting real-world test was the culmination of almost10 years of research and collaboration with industry suppliers.
Image taken from HMS Dragon, participating in Exercise Formidable Shield 2021. UK MOD © Crown copyright 2021
We work alongside the armed forces to develop and test new technologies in the field to get our research out of the lab and in to operational use as quickly as possible.
Dstland theUSAir Force Research Laboratory carried out the firstdeployment of a jointly developed artificial intelligence toolbox in 2 military exercises. The goal was to address the challenge of how to makeAIagile, adaptable, trustworthy and accessible to the warfighter under differentUSandUKmilitary use cases.
The trials showed how the toolbox would be deployed ontoUK-USuncrewed ground and aerial vehicles. Members of bothUKandUSarmed forces tested that theAIwas robust and that the intended users understood any limitations of theAI.
DuringExercise Spring Storm, soldiers from the 20th Armoured Infantry Brigade used anAIengine developed byDstland the Army in collaboration with industry.
This prototype was specifically designed for the way the Army is trained to operate. During the exercise,Dstlstaff analysed how theAIengine was used in practice, to understand the critical human factors including how we build trust in theAI.
TheAIengine uses automation and smart analytics along with supervised learning algorithms to save time and effort and help military personnel operate much more effectively. By instantly exploiting information on the surrounding environment and terrain, theAImakes it much quicker to plan and analyse different courses of action. This is one of the first steps towards achieving machine-speed command and control.
UK MOD © Crown copyright 2021
Dstlis also working with partners on howAIand autonomy pose opportunities and threats to traditional intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR). Our research ranges fromAI-enabledISRtasking and collection, to investigating the advantage that could be brought by quantum information processing. This work isn’t just done by ourAIspecialists but is a great example of how we work acrossDstl’s areas of expertise, such assensingandrobotics and autonomy.
We  have developed a standard approach forAIand autonomy in networked multi-sensor systems in security and defence which has been evaluated during multinational NATO trials, adopted byMODand industry, and published as British Standards Institute (BSI) Flex 335.
Sensing for Asset Protection with Integrated Electronic Networked Technology (SAPIENT) specifies standards and protocols to allowAIalgorithms to work together across a suite of sensors and share data with a mix of technologies.
As well as improving efficiency,SAPIENTcan help deliver enhanced situational awareness to support control and command of operations, and givesMODand our allies access to advancedAIsolutions being developed by our innovative supplier base.
During a recentAUKUStrial in Australia,Dstland theUKarmed forces collaborated with Australia and theUSin theTrusted Operation of Robotic Vehicles in Contested Environments (TORVICE) trial.
A number of missions were conducted, such as route reconnaissance while subject to a range of effects, and these aimed to understand and improve the resilience ofAUKUSAIand autonomy systems when subjected to attack. Understanding and mitigating the impact of threats is a key step towards deploying effective and reliableAIand autonomy systems on future operations.
TORVICEAITrial
We also work in partnership with theNational Quantum Technology Programme (NQTP), which provides unique insights into quantum information processing, complementing our own research and building expertise to support defence.
TheNQTP’s work includesfunding researchinto quantum machine learning models, hybrid (traditional/quantum) generative modelling to improve satellite imaging, as well as quantum fingerprinting to protect such models from cyber attacks.
Dstlis an outstanding centre for research and we have extensive collaboration underway with leadingAIorganisations. Whenever possible,Dstlworks with external suppliers in academia and industry to meet the needs of theUK’s defence and security.
We are working together withGoogle Cloudto accelerate the adoption ofAIin theUKdefence sector and withMicrosoftto deliver safe and responsible use ofAI.
Dstlis a strategic partner in thedefence and security research programmerun byThe Alan Turing Institutewho conduct world leading research in a large number of areas related to our needs.
As another example of our partnership with the Turing,Dstland theDefence and Security Accelerator (DASA)supported a studyidentifying hazardous chemical and biological contamination on surfaces. Working with industry and academic partners, we explored how machine learning and data science could be used to detect substances like anthrax and nerve agents, alongside the development of innovative sensor technologies. This could be safer and more efficient than current methods.
We frequently collaborate with universities and other academic institutions, often accelerating the research they have been doing and applying it to solve problems forUKdefence and security - it’s a fantastic opportunity for organisations to get to work on leading edge projects with real impact on the defence and security of the country.
In 2022, we formed theDefence Data Research Centre(DDRC) - a dedicated centre of excellence focusing on problems related to the use of data forAIapplications with a defence context.
We are working closely with staff at the universities of Southampton and Edinburgh, where2 new centres for doctoral traininghave been funded byMODto enable novel research in critical technology areas, such asAIand autonomy.
We have close links with other research bodies, including:
AIand data science underpin and enable all theUK’s defence and security science and technology capabilities. They have the potential to change everything.Dstlplays a pivotal role bringing together our scientific and technical expertise acrossMOD.
“Future conflicts may be won or lost on the speed and efficacy of theAIsolutions employed.” (Defence in a competitive age)
Our flagshipAIscience and technology programme delivers core defence-specific research, but also works across our capabilities to build up strong communities of practice to share and expand our expertise.
DrivingAIcloser to capability
We worked withDefence DigitalandMODto establish theDefenceAICentre(DAIC) to boost research and accelerate the adoption ofAItechnology (announced in theIntegrated Review).
The DAIC works collaboratively across defence, united and supported by a core team made up of Defence Digital (as part of Strategic Command),Defence Equipment and Support(Future Capability Group) andDstl. The team champion, enable and innovateAIacrossUKdefence, working with government, industry, academia and our allies for the strategic advantage of our armed forces. This includes working withDASAto help connect with innovators both in theUKand abroad.
In 2022, we opened abrand newAIand data science unit based at the National Innovation Centre for Data in Newcastle, opening up new local opportunities for individuals and institutions to work with us.
As part of our work in government, we support learning and up-skilling of people working across the defence and security sector. We also want to make it easier for more people to work with us. Our approach to this is broad, from enabling government customers commissioning our services to attracting talent from outside the defence industry to work with us.
We run regular events (such asAIFest) to bring together theAIcommunity across government, industry, academia and international partners. At these events, world-leading experts share their experiences including the challenges of military adoption ofAI. We also discuss how to build an effectiveAIcapability.
Our series ofBiscuit Booksprovide simple introductions to some of the complex concepts related toAI, data science and machine learning. Topics covered includehuman-centred ways of working withAIin intelligence analysisandassurance ofAIand autonomous systems.
We are responsible and ethical in our use ofAIand we are leading the way in helping others (across defence, wider government and internationally) with safe adoption.
We helped formMOD’s internal guidance on best practice for ethics in developing or using systems which useAI, to achieve theAmbitious, safe, responsiblepolicy statement. This statement sets out the5 ethical principleswe follow:
Through our strong links with academia we are contributing toresearch into the ethical use ofAIin defence.
Dstl’s experts have also collaborated with the Institution of Engineering and Technology to help raise awareness of theeffective use ofAIin safety-related functions, highlighting the importance of underpinning regulation and good practice to embedAIsafety.
Our staff, industry and academic partners work across a range of scientific and technology capabilities including:
We are always looking for talented individuals to join us.
You will work on real-world problems, with the chance to see your science and technology expertise put into practice, including hugely exciting opportunities for overseas travel and working with theUK’s allies.
Experience in defence is not necessary, and roles vary from apprenticeships to visiting fellowships (for example, we have a Visiting research scheme with the Alan Turing Institute). While we have a high intake of graduates, you can also be mid-career, looking to re-skill and re-train.
We work across Defence to partner with academic institutions and build relationships with suppliers. We particularly welcome companies and research bodies who have not worked with defence before, and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
There are several routes toworking with us:
Talk to us about potential future partnerships and projects by emailingcentralenquiries@dstl.gov.uk
Added video about 'Driving AI closer to capability'.
New video of the 3 nations of AUKUS have trialled a futuristic integration of autonomy and AI.
Updated with links to the latest case studies and information about Dstl's work on AI.
First published.