A list of places to find Defence contracts and funding in the technology and innovative research and development (R&D) space.
Every year the Ministry of Defence (MOD) works with companies and researchers to develop next-generation innovation, technology and digital solutions to support our frontline troops. You can find some of the places we advertise those opportunities on this page. This is not an exhaustive list.
Opportunities outside the technology and innovation space can be found atProcurement atMOD.
To give feedback on this page, please contact theCommercial Xteam atdefcomrcl-comrclx@mod.gov.uk.
A common way for suppliers to bid for contracts is via online platforms known as frameworks. These have standard terms and processes which make it easier to contract with us. Once you are on a framework you can apply for any advertised opportunities until the framework ends.
The frameworks cover a range of goods and services. Some are ‘dynamic’, which means they can be joined at any time. Others are only open during certain periods, so if you miss the sign up period you will need to wait for it to re-open again.
DASA finds and funds exploitable innovation for a safer future.
DASA innovation partners support those with innovative ideas or products that could be of use in Defence to get funding, find contracts, write business cases and get introductions to sponsors.
Contact your local innovation partner
Submit an innovative idea to improve the defence and security of the UK
Your idea could be a concept, product or service, at various levels of maturity.
No funding limit but generally up to £250,000
Submit your idea
Submit a proposal around a specific area of government interest
Viewcurrent themed competitions
Get a loan as an SME to develop a mature innovative defence solution into a strong business proposition
Loans of up to £1 million
Open for proposals all year round
View details of defence innovation loans
Future Capability Innovation team:
Future Capability Innovationare sponsors of Futures Lab, a place where academia and industry come together to solve complexMODchallenges.
There is anintro sessionevery Monday for new joiners.Find out more and register to join.
Defence Battle Lab:
Battle Labis an online community and physical co-working space in Dorset for business and academia to come together to innovate for Defence.
Battle labs can be used to make, test, and trial solutions in collaboration with Defence. Battle labs can also be used to book desks and access meeting rooms.
Apply to join on the Battle Lab website.
Accelerated Capability Environment (ACE):
ACE helps government and the police tackle safety and security challenges arising from our growing use of technology.
ACE brings hundreds of suppliers and academics together to solve these challenges. It is open to new joiners and is run by QinetiQ.
Apply to join on their website
Accessing PhD research funding from the Ministry of Defence
Defence and Security Innovation Signposting documentwith details of 5 organisations that also commission innovative technologies in defence, including details of the technology readiness levels (TRLs) they support.
Added a framework under  'Current opportunities'.
Updated information on frameworks under 'Current opportunities'. Added 'Future pipeline'.
First published.