This privacy notice explains what personal data is collected through the extended producer responsibility for packaging service and how that personal data is used.
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) for packaging is a component part of wider Collection and Packaging Reforms (CPR) programme that will require certain producers of packaging to take greater responsibility for its disposal and recycling. This privacy notice explains what personal data is being collected through the services (including ‘report packaging data’) provided under the EPR for packaging and how that personal data is used.
If you have any queries about the content of this privacy notice, email:
pEPRdataandserviceownerteam@Defra.gov.uk
The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) is controller for the personal data we collect:
Department for Environment, Food and Rural AffairsSeacole Building2 Marsham StreetLondonSW1P 4DF
If you need further information about how Defra uses your personal data and your associated rights, you can contact the Defra data protection manager at the above postal address or email:
data.protection@Defra.gov.uk
The data protection officer for Defra is responsible for checking that Defra complies with legislation. you can contact the Defra data protection manager at the above postal address or email:
DefraGroupDataProtectionOfficer@Defra.gov.uk
Defra is also acting as the ‘data processor’ for the personal data being collected through some services. As the data processor, we collect and share data on behalf of the following 4 environmental regulatory bodies:
Depending on the services you use, Defra collects your:
We collect this data for the following purposes.
The environmental regulators will use your data to undertake their statutory monitoring role for EPR for packaging. This includes:
The scheme administrator will use the data to:
Defra will use your data:
Depending on the services you use, Defra obtains your personal data from:
The lawful basis for processing your personal data is that it is necessary to:
EPR for packaging was introduced in support of the Government’s25 Year Environment Plan. This is underpinned bysections 50 and 51 of Part 3andSchedule 4andSchedule 5of the Environment Act 2021.
It is also supported by legislation in each of the four nations:
The processing of your personal data is not based on consent. You cannot withdraw it.
We will share the personal data collected under this privacy notice with the environmental regulators. We do this to deliver services as part of EPR for packaging.
The environmental regulators are controllers in their own right. You can learn more about how your personal data is processed by readingthe environmental regulators’ joint privacy notice.
We will publish a public list of large producers (PLLP) in accordance with legislation in each nation and subsequent amendments.
Defra respects your personal privacy when responding to access to information requests. We only share information when necessary to meet the statutory requirements of the Environmental Information Regulations 2004 and the Freedom of Information Act 2000.
We will keep your personal data for 7 years in line with the requirements of the EPR for packaging, except data related to Invoicing activities which will be retained for 11 years.
You will not be able to use EPR for packaging services.
The personal data you provide is not used for:
Defra will only transfer your personal data to another country that is deemed adequate for data protection purposes.
Based on the lawful processing above, your individual rights are:
Find out more about your individual rightsunder the UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK GDPR) and the Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA 2018).
You have the right tomake a complaint to the Information Commissioner’s Officeat any time.
Defra’s personal information charterexplains more about your rights over your personal data.
Small update: the scheme administrator and Defra may use your data to contact you about your submission or new documents in your account.
This updates the privacy notice to cover aspects of the extended producer responsibility for packaging programme beyond the report packaging data service.
Added translation